Compiler type/mode inference review (2026-09-10)

2026-09-17 compiler-selection milestone: `compiler/` now uses the lighter
pre-MetaDecl parser/normalizer. The independent newer checker, `.cif`
interfaces, lexical-scope query support, `--main`, `--exe`, SWI-WASM host path,
and diagnostics remain current. Added arbitrary undeclared functor expressions:
`x=:F(1,2)` and `x=:Empty`. Their arguments are checked normally, while the
result has type Functor and intentionally bypasses declaration, parent, field,
and arity checks. MetaDecl source is intentionally rejected. The only source
relations present in compiler-0.8.43 but absent from the active compiler are the
MetaDecl parser and expansion relations. Lua/Wasmoon compiler support and
fallback paths have been removed; native and browser compilation both use SWI.
The active compiler suite passes 23/23 and the broader
Space/events/Canvas/runtime selection passes 10/10.

2026-09-13 milestone: added located undeclared-call diagnostics, arithmetic
expression type checking, and interface types for exported table data fields,
including nested fields and tables exported through local variables. Native
cross-file regressions cover data fields, method signatures, callback aliases,
missing members, noncallable fields, and renamed copies of the test3 source.
Interfaces use .cif; dependencies still need to be compiled explicitly.
Milestone verification: all six compiler modules rebuild identically without
Lua; all 17 compiler tests pass, including native cross-file checks, renamed
source diagnostics, SWI-WASM execution, and synchronous Canvas host dispatch.

Implemented in this pass

- Made type compatibility directional. A value of a declared subtype may flow
  into a parent type, but a parent value can no longer satisfy a child-type
  parameter merely because the two types are related. The former behavior
  compiled programs that then failed the generated runtime input contract.
- Classify parsed numeric literals as Real, matching the SWI-Prolog value emitted
  by the parser. Real remains assignable to Number, so existing Number contracts
  continue to work while Real contracts can be checked directionally.
- Treat a typed declaration without an initializer as definitely fresh. It is
  rejected as an In argument and accepted as an Out argument.
- Stop treating In arguments as values produced by a call. Only Out and inferred
  produced positions change the bound-variable state.
- Added regression coverage for nominal subtype direction and typed fresh output
  variables, then regenerated the self-hosted compiler.

Confirmed current implementation

- The checker already performs fixed-point call-contract inference, conservative
  forward flow analysis, imported callable lookup, imported schema merging,
  interface emission, and conflict checking for imported types.
- compiler/platform/driver.pl reads available dependency interface artifacts and
  supplies them to compile_unit. This is partial imported-interface support; the
  guide's blanket statement that imported type interfaces are unsupported is now
  too broad.

Still to implement

1. Complete whole-program inference across branches, loops, recursion, closures,
   aliases, and unannotated relation bodies. Compute stable joined type and mode
   facts instead of falling back to Any at uncertain joins.
2. Infer and validate success and determinism properties, including propagation
   through the call graph and enforcement for exported interfaces.
3. Make dependency compilation recursive: resolve require paths, compile stale or
   missing dependencies, detect import cycles, and cache/version interface files.
4. Export only public/reachable schemas rather than copying every local schema
   into each interface; qualify names to avoid unrelated modules colliding.
5. Carry constructor/class/protocol member interfaces through imports so imported
   constructor arity, method mode/type, and protocol conformance can be checked.
6. Define conservative behavior for missing, incompatible, or newer interface
   formats and report the importing source location in diagnostics.
7. Add multi-module tests covering imported relations and nominal types,
   conflicting names, stale/missing interfaces, cycles, and recursive builds.

Verification

- node compiler/build.mjs
  Verified all six Cosmos compiler modules rebuild identically without Lua.
- node --test tests/compiler/compiler.test.mjs
  23 tests passed, including native CLI/REPL, application entry modes, imported
  interface checks, shipped SWI-WASM coverage, and arbitrary functors.
